Richard, welcome. We've voted.
Great to be here. I had some adventures this morning. I'm sorry to delay so long.
Yeah, you had to go to space, which is very, very accurate.
Yeah. You know, compared to all the things that you're into and the things we talked about before. So yeah, people out in the live stream. Thank you for being here. Thank you for being patient and sticking around.
Yeah, Richard had a little bit of internet trouble.
He's in this glorious, but somewhat remote location.
- So we do have cable modems up here,
but the cable modem died.
We're in Pacific Northwest,
and it looks like the stream heat may have damaged the wire.
So now they're, they want to replace the wire.
But I had, I got on the beta of Starlink a while back.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Fun to play with,
but suddenly we're depending on Starlink
because the cable modem stopped working.
Although, and it's been pretty good,
but if you're watching this,
you can see the video and certainly this audio,
it's coming to you from space.
- Yeah, it may or may not glitch just a little bit,
but the recording-- - There are some dropouts.
- Yeah, yeah, so, and thanks for your patience with that.
All right, Richard, you ready to kick this off?
- Do it.
- Richard, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
- Yeah, it's been a year, quite a year, as I recall.
- We're living in like dog years or something like that.
Every year is like seven years.
I don't know if we spoke about it,
but I have definitely joked that historians,
when they come back and study this timeframe,
they won't be able to say what decade
or what era they studied.
It'll be like, well, what part of 2020 did you study?
What part of 2021 did you study?
Did you study the summer or was it the spring?
'Cause that's a different specialty.
- How much it's changed.
And that we're still living
with a certain level of uncertainty.
that at the time that we're recording this,
the Delta variant's having an impact
and I think everyone's sort of leaning back again,
going, "How bad is this gonna get?"
So, yeah, I don't know.
A month from now, things would be very different.
Either way.
- Yeah, it could go either way.
That's absolutely right.
Yeah, so I'm cautiously optimistic,
trying to live life, be safe,
but not be huddled in a corner for too badly.
- And for your own sanity.
I mean, one nice thing about being up on the coast
is like the view is impeccable.
The we're right on the ocean.
You'll probably even hear a bit in the recording,
like to be able to be out here and breathe the air
and just try and connect with folks.
Even if it's, it has to be remote, that's all.
- Yeah, yeah.
Well, for the audio podcast listeners,
tell us how you are speaking to us.
- How am I speaking to you?
- Yeah, yeah.
on the internet?
I got on the beta for Starlink right at the very beginning and because we're in this relatively
new era, we opted in very early on.
There is cable modem service up here but it's broken at the moment and so there's repairs
trying to be done this morning which is one of the reasons we delayed recording.
But they have not been successful so far.
counting on Elon's magic as now the largest satellite operator in the world.
And soon he'll be more satellites than everybody else combined at the rate he's going.
And it's been pretty good. There are dropouts, it's never flawless. And this is what we're asking
it to do, this real-time thing is of course the hardest thing to do. Right, right. We're going
real-time to space, which is pretty amazing, but it's kind of cool. I haven't had a chance to speak
with anyone who's had real experience with Starlink.
So it's neat to have it.
- You're part of the experiment now, friend.
Here we are.
- Exactly.
We were planning on using high-speed wired internet,
but it broke.
And so it's a really cool fallback to have.
And I think it's actually gonna be really empowering
for people in places where that's not an option.
- Yeah, and certainly I've talked to a bunch of friends
who are all very interested in it.
And because I'm right on the ocean,
I have a view of the sky.
And that's the real problem with Starlink,
is you need an absolutely clear view of the sky.
And often when you're in remote locations,
you're surrounded by trees,
and trees and Starlink are not friends.
- And satellites definitely don't mix.
- Yeah, it just doesn't work.
- Well, I'm really glad that we're able to make this happen.
And I say that with fingers crossed
for another 45 minutes or whatever it's going to be.
- By the time we, yeah.
Let's hope the satellites are well aligned
for this next period and we'll have a good call.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So this episode is gonna be like some of the previous ones
that you've been on before
and that it's going to be one of these geek out episodes.
And the geek out episodes I learned about,
which mostly, I guess, premiered on .NET Rocks.
Is that right? - Right.
Yeah, it was totally my friend Carl's idea.
I did not wanna do these.
I thought it was a bad idea and I was wrong.
So the first Geek Out was back in 2011
and it was about the shuttle ending
and just my thoughts on what went right
and what went wrong with the space shuttle.
And it continued from there, it became a pleasure for me.
I'm a researcher by nature
and I've always been organizing my (indistinct)
just 'cause I like to read and research.
And the shows basically drove me to finish.
now make an hour long conversation about that technology.
- Isn't that interesting about being able
to present something?
- Yeah.
- That you have to, you close those loops
that you're like, oh, that's interesting,
but I am not gonna dig into that corner
or that corner of this thing.
And then when you've got to stand up and present it,
you know, I feel like that's a great way to learn stuff
in general as people in technology,
not just for the geek out thing.
- One of the series that I'm very proud of
that absolutely the process of making this show
transformed it was the Fusion series because I originally thought I'd do a show on Fusion,
but as I started really organizing all the materials, I realized there was three different
shows there. There was a show about national fusion like the ITER and JET and the National
Ignition Laboratories, all these big government projects. And then there was the tech billionaire
pet fusion projects because you're not a cool tech billionaire if you don't have one. And
So there's a moment where I realized,
geez, every one of them has one, and they're all wacky.
And then I ran across a set of papers out
at Mitsubishi Labs about fusion reactions.
And that actually walked us into a real conversation
about cold fusion, which surprised me.
Because it's like pseudoscience for a long time.
But the Mitsubishi Labs experiments in the late 2000
were very real and repeatable.
They, you know, Mitsubishi was smart enough
that when they realized they had something consistent,
they handed it over to Toyota, their arch rival,
and said, "Here, you reproduce this."
'Cause if anybody was gonna reproduce this,
it was their arch rival.
And they repeated the experiment successfully.
And if you listen to that show, I'll give away the ending.
Yes, you can do lower energy nuclear reactions.
They are a kind of fusion.
It's a part of science that's not well understood.
more energy to do it than it produces.
Just the sort of thing you don't want from a power plant.
- Exactly, well you can make it happen,
but it doesn't produce net energy.
- No, it's the fun part of that show
is I'm walking Carl through the process,
and Carl's always a great everyman
for these kinds of things,
and I actually taught muon catalyzed fusion,
which is a different kind of low energy fusion,
and very repeatable, workable, and so forth.
It's just that it takes more energy to make muons
than the fusion, which it turns out
is every kind of fusion except stellar fusion,
that's how it's always worked.
It takes more energy to fuse than it emits.
- Yeah, well, if you got that much gravity,
it definitely is an unfair advantage.
So yeah, so this is going to be another one
of these Geek Out episodes, and we're mostly
going to just focus on the energy side.
So it's sort of relevant that you're talking about fusion here.
The other thing I guess that's worth just giving a quick shout out to
is you're organizing the Dev Intersection Conference, right?
Yeah, so we did a show back in June as a full hybrid show.
So some attendees in person, some attendees remote,
and some speakers in person, some speakers.
We know how to do that.
We're hoping to do a more in-person show in Vegas,
but we're prepared to do hybrid again if necessary,
because we pulled it off.
But this is a developer show and we have a lot of Microsoft,
so there's lots of .NET content,
but also web content across the board,
plenty of Azure, artificial intelligence technologies, and databases.
So it's a very big, broad show and a ton of fun,
and the MGM brand is a great location for it.
Yeah, that's really cool.
I feel like, you know, last time we spoke,
this was the pre-Delta, pre-large-scale vaccine,
and like, "Oh, look, we're sort of crossing over the hump,
And this is going to be like, you'll be able to put this back on,
no problem. And then...
And again, ask me in a month, and maybe it'll be fine.
But at the moment, we're all holding our breath,
it's like, we know what to do if we have to.
I hope we don't have to.
Absolutely.
Alright, so let's dive into our main topic.
- Okay. - We are on a bit of a time crunch
since we're going to space.
- On this one, I wanted to talk to you about energy.
And I think there's a lot of things happening
around energy that's both optimistic and amazing,
as well as, you know, there's setbacks and other things.
So, you know, let's talk about sort of the story of energy,
specifically, mostly renewable energy these days.
Like, how are we doing?
- We're doing pretty well.
I mean, obviously the pandemic changed things.
Power consumption overall, especially electricity,
especially in the West during the pandemic,
closing of malls and commercial spaces and so forth,
because those spaces tend to be very efficient
in the sense that you do shut them down,
they reduced a lot of power consumption.
Now everybody went home and consumed more power at home,
But if you think about the normal work cycle
where people are at home, then they go to work,
and then they come back again,
the home is typically not as diligently shut down
as office spaces.
So homes have a sort of always on
certain amount of power consumption going on.
- Yeah, I suspect a bunch of people,
yeah, I bet a bunch of people
just leave their AC set to whatever.
- Exactly.
- I have one of these nests.
- In Bilston, as I've been studying my house,
heated floors, those electrically heated floors
consume a lot more power than you realize.
And if you learn how long it takes to get to the temperature
and so forth, so that you can shut them down
and heat them up when you need them,
that's a lot of power.
That's a kilowatt per floor per day, easy.
- Oh, how interesting.
Yeah, that is a lot of energy.
Yeah, and air conditioners too,
and I suspect a lot of people don't shut them down.
So I saw an article recently that talked about
Oh, we're actually being set back by people working from home because we all now have
our computers on and our lights on and our AC or our heater, or depending on the time
of the year at everybody's house instead of one giant office.
But what I don't believe that took into account was the person who lives 45 minutes away from
the office and commutes with an old suburban SUV that is burning extra gas.
I think it just looked at the energy of the office and the energy of the homes and said,
"Oh, there's more at the homes."
Right?
But...
It limited the community.
Well, but I don't think that's true either.
In some respects, you have the same computer, if not a less efficient computer at the office.
And so those things were turned off.
I think the move to the cloud actually ends up being energy efficient because business owned servers tend to be less...
are actually gaining efficiency in terms of power consumption
by shifting those workloads into the cloud,
those machines run at a much higher constant utilization rate.
So there's fewer CPUs serving far more workloads that way.
Right, how many VPCs, virtual servers run on top of
one piece of hardware?
Exactly, I mean, a lot.
And of course, they're paid for that,
their margin is in that optimization,
where typically your owned servers
just don't have that same level of utilization.
But I think that the biggest thing that created
in the West the huge power drops was that
folks shut down those buildings.
They turned as much off as they could,
far more reliable than anything else.
The drop in oil, recognizing that oil consumption
is a form of gasoline and kerosene,
50% of all oil is going into road transport and air.
And so that drop was tremendous
during the peak of the pandemic.
In April of 2020, the oil industry calls that black April
because in the West it was like 30% reduction.
On a typical day in 20,
the world consumed about 80 million barrels of oil.
In April of 2020, it was like 45 million.
- Yeah, that's amazing.
- This is the thing is, that oil moves all the time.
And so if you recall, there was a crisis
where oil actually went to niggas
'cause nobody had anywhere to store it.
- I remember that.
And there was all these people investing
in sort of indirectly in oil.
And what I think there were some of them,
they didn't realize that they were on the hook
to store that oil.
- Exactly.
- And then they got seriously-
- Oil tankers arriving at refineries
with nowhere to offload 'cause the tanks were all full.
And now the ship was effectively a storage machine.
Like that's how bad it got for a month.
And it hasn't fully recovered.
Like oil consumption is still down.
They don't expect road transport consumption.
And I'm referencing the IEA report.
This is the International Energy Association.
It's very challenging to get good energy data,
quality energy data.
And this is a group, they're operated out of Paris,
but they're worldwide.
And they are very agnostic.
They're not owned by any energy companies.
You know, typically when you go looking for data like this,
you will find energy companies telling you
about how their energy is great.
Reasonable report you can get
in terms of levelizing all of those numbers.
- You've heard the clean natural gas.
- Yeah, well, cleaner than coal.
- It's a relative statement.
- Give them that.
It's about half the emission level of coal
with significant emissions and it's cheap.
And it's why natural gas has done so well.
So the IEA, they break down a lot of these pandemic details.
And one of the points they made is like,
road transport consumption will probably reach 2019 levels
by 2021, but air transport won't.
The air transport's gonna take longer to come back.
People aren't flying.
- Yeah. - And it's had a huge impact.
Yes, we move a lot of stuff by cargo,
but we move far more people by air.
And so airplanes that are still parked
and the decrease in consumption all around is not small.
And so in that sense, our emissions have dropped
a non-trivial amount in the process.
And the good news is when that power consumption drop happened, the power plants that got turned
off were the dirtiest ones.
So coal consumption went down dramatically in 2020 because power consumption went down.
That's really good.
I mean, that was the plants that they turned off, except in China.
China actually added coal consumption because China increased their power consumption throughout
the pandemic.
They also, I mean, to give fair credit to China, there may have been 50% of the increase
in coal consumption in 2020.
There were also 50% of the increase in renewables over 2020.
So China is growing very rapidly.
They're building out a lot of infrastructure and they did not stop through the pandemic.
- They did a better job of containing the pandemic as well.
- I don't know if that's true.
What they certainly did was did a good job
of containing any data about their pandemic response.
- Yeah, okay, fair.
They also have the freedom, that's not the right word.
They have the flexibility to impose rules differently
than suggestions that we have
like in North America and Europe.
- Well, and one of the big cases is like
the whole world has benefited from the fact
that the Chinese government chose to simply build
gigantic solar power plants to manufacture solar
at a massive scale and drove the price down of solar.
It probably wasn't the most economically efficient way
to go about it, but it's the advantage of having,
you know, the single party rule system that says,
thou shalt build big solar factories, and they did.
- Yeah.
- And, yeah, again, set the price of solar to the floor,
to the point where we now in the West use solar differently.
You know, once upon a time, solar panels were so precious,
you put them on articulated arms
to aim them perfectly at the sun throughout the day
to maximize utilization.
These days, and they're expensive.
And so when Germany did this huge push towards solar,
as they started to try and wind down their nuclear power,
They were putting all of these solar panels in,
all aimed south, because they're in the north,
and they get the most light if they're physically aimed south,
until they were generating so much power
at the middle of the day when they didn't need it,
that it was actually a problem for their grid.
And they don't do that anymore.
They now point their panels east and west,
which seems foolish, because it means you get less utilization
per panel.
But what you're actually doing is smoothing out
your power generation.
You don't need as much power.
What you need is more power in the morning
and more power in the evening.
And moving those panels, using each panel less efficiently,
actually makes a more efficient grid.
- How interesting.
So I think the area I really wanna focus on
with our conversation is that storage side,
because I think that's the magic of unlocking things.
- Sure.
- Before we do, have you seen Project Sunroof?
- I have, it doesn't work in Canada, unfortunately.
- That's unfortunate.
The sun is totally different there or no?
Well, it has a U in its name, so what are you gonna do?
- Yeah, yeah.
So this thing lets you go to your address
or anyone's address and click on it and say,
it gives you a heat map of the roof of your house
for the amount of energy it's going to receive.
And unfortunately here, I'm also in the Pacific Northwest.
And one of the things that I think is glorious about here
is right in my yard, I have 150 year old trees
that are super high, right?
which are amazing, unless you want solar radiation.
- Unless you want sunlight to hit places, yeah.
- Exactly, there's like a little sliver.
- Or Starlink for that matter.
- Yeah, both are out for me.
Like I actually had some solar people come out
and estimate, does it make any sense to, I mean,
like put the money aside, does it even make sense
just from a climate perspective?
And they're like, you know what?
It's gonna take five years to pay off the carbon
of manufacturing, just the panels.
Like, ah, all right, yeah, this is like too inefficient
to justify, unfortunately, but--
- Yeah, your yields are just too low.
And it's like, if you really wanted
to reduce your carbon footprint,
spending that money on the best,
the most efficient appliances you could have.
- Right, or redoing your installation or something like that.
- Or even using things like the Tesla power consumption types.
Those things represent,
You know, the problem with most grid power
is that it pretty much generates
the same amount of power all the time.
Grid is not that flexible.
It takes a while to spin up those big power plants.
And so, for peak, and if most people,
you know, the concept of Powerwall was,
hey, if I can take you off the grid during peak,
if I can store power at the cheap times,
and then use that power at the peak times,
we can turn off a peak power plant.
- Yeah, absolutely.
And it seems completely reasonable.
You know, there's been a lot of success, I think,
with the grid scale utility level power pack
that Tesla does.
And I think if you had--
- Yeah, a lot of success.
There's been a few.
There's been Australia being the famous one.
- Yeah, that's the one I was thinking of, for sure.
- Yeah.
They just had a big fire at one of them.
In terms of, you know, lithium-ion burns prolifically.
- Yeah, I was gonna call that out.
Where was that one?
That was, yeah, that one was definitely,
I guess I can't pull it up.
But yeah, I would imagine. - The biggest advantage
of battery over all storage methods period is recovery.
That it comes about 90% efficient.
So put 100, get 90 kilowatts out
in exchange for expensive.
- Yeah. - Right, that's the issue.
Is that they're expensive installations,
they do have fire risks.
constrained, although we're starting to see some other
battery technologies come down the pipe. The famous, the big
news stories at the moment are around iron based batteries. So
liquid, it's not the iron is not liquid, but it's a liquid
electrolyte, iron battery, essentially rust batteries. So
you are when you oxidize the iron, you can move, you can
store electricity, and then you deoxidize to release the
electricity.
Oh, interesting. It's almost like electrolysis, but applied
to iron? Yeah, and it's the same. And fundamentally, that's what all batteries are, right? It's
doing a chemical reaction that creates new compounds. You're not going to find iron batteries
in your phone anytime soon. They are big, they are heavy, but they are very grid scale.
The most advanced batteries that I've seen that seem to have the best backing right now
are a company called Form Energy. So they've raised about $125 million, which seems like
a lot and it is in this space but all power is hundreds of millions of dollars
so they haven't got a deal yet but they've been had some breakthroughs in
their battery their typical battery unit is about size of a dishwasher so again
that's the wouldn't be good for for a phone it's also because it has a liquid
in its orientation really matter so these are meant to be held in place
mounted on the ground.
They run pretty hot, so they're not the sort of thing
you want to be around, but they're cheap.
Like, typically with lithium ion batteries today,
we're coming in around 100,
it may be as low as $80 a kilowatt.
And believe me, like, when $100 a kilowatt
was (audio cuts out) class batteries,
that was considered the point where
now we are price competitive with internal combustion cars.
And that breakthrough was in the past couple of years.
These iron batteries are coming in at $20 a kilowatt.
- Wow.
- So--
- Are they more stable than the lithium ones as well?
- They're, yeah, they're far less fire risk.
And slow, steady discharging.
So one of the claims to fame for the Form Energy battery
is full 100 hours.
So the idea that, again, if you think about
What does a grid want?
It's that ability to have stable power all of the time.
And so being able to count on a long duration battery
makes a lot of sense.
So this is not the kind of battery you'd want in your home.
Like we have this home-based,
hey, we're going to spend less on the grid.
We're going to put some solar panels in,
we're going to put some power walls in,
and we'll use the grid as backup
and take less pressure off of that.
But grid scale power,
you're starting to see different kinds of storage system.
And this is the first battery technology
I've seen that's really based on grid style storage
and has that really high efficiency rating.
But it's not the only way to store power.
- Yeah, before we move off of energy.
Yeah, yeah, before we move off of just the battery side,
I do wanna ask you, if you use your crystal ball
and look into the future,
do you see a world where we've got
renewable energy locally generated,
like on roofs in California
and maybe a power wall on a house?
Like I could see California mandating
every house comes with some sort of local battery.
- Yeah, and they have mandated solar.
You don't have to apply for a permit
to not put solar on your house.
- Which, perfect.
- I mean, California has often done these kinds of things.
The battery technology is a little trickier.
They are expensive, they are relatively fragile,
but yeah, it's possible,
but it's easier solved with grid in some respects.
- Yeah, I was gonna say, do you see that future
or do you see a future where we've got,
you know, massive grid scale type of generation and storage.
- I think it's going to be lots of both
because there's good reasons for both.
Now, and one of the challenges here
when you start thinking about this micro grid behavior
of having, it is the grid needs to get much smarter.
We need internet technology applied
to electrical generation and utilization.
It's because it's a peer to peer kind of problem.
And I mean, we're in computing, so we get that.
But if you go talk to people who've worked
Peer-to-peer is bizarre to them, right?
They are very much a fewest number of power plants
necessary to supply the load
and a single set of wires to feed it out.
Redundancy is an expensive, often unnecessary thing.
And so, but that is clearly changing
is we are creating more automation.
So I think people will have a choice
on how they want to consume in that respect,
but we're starting to perfect grid storage
and mostly because our renewals deliver a levelized load.
They deliver when they deliver
and we need to levelize with other strategies
and that's where storage comes into play.
- Yeah, all right.
Two other things really quick, maybe one altogether.
So we had a lot of resistance in the US
to putting up windmills, wind farms off the East Coast
because the people with their yachts,
when they went a little farther out,
they would see the windmills and they really hated it.
And then out in the desert in Nevada,
though what would have been a tremendously large solar,
grid scale solar is canceled because the electric,
the article headline is the US largest solar farm
is canceled because Nevada locals don't wanna look at it
while they're out on their all train vehicles,
which I love riding all train vehicles.
I'm not against that, but you know.
- Well, in Nevada, also, the problem of--
Yeah, I mean, people, there is always an NB effect.
What's interesting about a place like Nevada and New Mexico
is that they're doing heliosolar.
So rather than using photovoltaic,
they're using reflectors to heat molten salt.
And what's interesting about that at that scale
is the salt, that it still generates power
through the night.
You know, I mean, there's a bunch of ways
to use molten salt.
It's used in nuclear reactors,
it's used in power storage systems,
it's used in helium systems.
The thing that's powerful about salts,
whatever they may be, sodium-based salts,
fluorine-based salts, it doesn't really matter,
is that their operating liquid temperature,
the temperature that they turn from a solid into a liquid
is around 400 degrees Celsius,
it varies from material to material,
but their boiling point when they'll turn into a gas
is past 400 degrees.
So you have this huge operating range of liquid, right?
as opposed to water, which only has 100 degree range.
And I'm using Celsius 'cause I'm a civilized human
for the liquid range.
And that's not, the advantage being,
I can do flash steam turbines
against 500 degree Celsius salts
just as easily as I can do against 800 degree salts
and so forth.
And so they carry heat long enough
that you can bridge nighttime.
- Right, so that's even a form of storage in a sense.
- It is, and it has been, there is a mechanism,
Like if we have more solar than we know what to do with,
why don't we switch it to heaters to heat this salt up?
'Cause after it gets past a certain temperature threshold,
it'll generate a lot of heat.
Now it's not, because of that floor,
that minimum temperature,
molten salt storage is not as efficient as battery storage.
Battery storage comes in at 90%,
molten salts come in at 70%.
On the other hand, they're very persistent,
they are less risks,
they're a well-known technology,
So if you have the materials, it's a good solution.
- Yeah.
- You know, but there are more, right?
For years we've been using pumped hydro storage
where you pump water up a hill
and then when you need it, you let the water come back down.
- Right, so yeah.
So let's talk about some of the ones that are not
straight straight of battery, right?
So like you said, that one's been pretty popular.
- Been around a long time.
- Yeah, I was really blown away
when I first heard about that.
So the idea is you might be at the face of a mountain
and there might be a mountain lake up right there.
So you could have a lake at the bottom
and a lake at the top.
And as you generate the energy,
all the extra just pumps the water to the top.
And then when you let it out,
you run it through some kind of hydroelectric thing.
- Put it through a turbine on the way back down,
you get the power.
And that's got about an 80% return.
So more efficient than molten salt,
not as efficient as battery.
It's terrain specific.
- Yeah.
- Now there's another gravity solution
that doesn't need a mountain.
It's called crane-based storage,
where they use a very tall crane
and they use the electric power to lift concrete blocks
and stack them higher and higher and higher.
And then when you want to discharge,
you pick the block up and let it come down
and spin a turbine, spin a generator
to generate electricity from it.
That's kind of nouveau.
The current efficiency, nobody's built one to scale yet,
but the experimental,
we're going into 80 years of this,
experimental, bringing in the 80% range.
- So there's challenges with the water one, right?
You're moving water up high and what if it,
what if the dam or the pipes were to break
and to flood the city that it was near?
- Well, and you hit the point.
It's also, there's only so much water you can pump up.
Like what happens when you run out of water?
What happens when you run out of room?
Like now it's going to over,
typically they're dammed water storage.
Like the dam can only hold so much too.
So it has limits where the crane based
reach the blocks and doesn't get past his leverage moments.
You can put a lot of blocks in place.
You can build a crane larger,
you can put its arm out longer.
So that's interesting.
Although it's, they're going to be more expensive
and have more maintenance.
- Yeah, you can build more cranes.
You could dig a hole in the ground
and have this giant block of concrete or whatever,
go up and down, you know,
- Hundreds of meters underground, right?
- Yeah, well, lots of blocks, right?
So when you have excess power,
you're lifting blocks and stacking them high,
and then more and more and more of them.
And then when you need the power,
you're letting them come back down one after the other.
You have to levelize the power.
Like there's some tricks to it.
It's not a simple solution,
but it works anywhere that you've got some flat land.
- Yeah, which with a bulldozer is almost anywhere.
- Yeah, with some enthusiasm and some dynamite,
you can make anything flat.
(laughing)
- That's right.
So that seems like a really good solution.
And so this is the thing that I really am excited
to talk to you about because I get so frustrated
when I hear things like, well, it would be great
if this pipe dream you had could come true
and you could run stuff on solar and wind,
but it's never gonna work because I wanna watch TV at night
and not be cold at night.
So it doesn't work.
It's never, it's unstable.
And there's all this creative stuff going on
like pumped hydro, like molten salt,
like we could just dig a hole in the ground
and use some really complicated transmission.
- You take the mixture of the iron-based batteries,
the $20 per kilowatt hour battery with wind and solar,
which are now so cheap and have grown a lot
through the pandemic too.
They're now the second largest source of power
and they've had the biggest growth.
And admittedly, the largest renewable still hydroelectric,
but solar and wind are growing rapidly,
very, very successful.
The offshore wind power movement is an interesting one,
where they're getting not just in the water.
Right now, when they go in the water with wind power,
they're doing near shore, not too deep, 100 feet, 200 feet,
something to anchor to the bottom on.
But they've now hit a point where they're ready
to start using more of the oil rig technologies
to do floating turbines.
So now you can go a couple of hundred miles offshore
or more off the continental shelf.
- Right, that was the- - And run the turbines
out there. - So,
you know, two of the challenges that I saw
when I was thinking about that was,
one, you've got to dig down into the ground
and you're disturbing the ecosystem of, you know,
oysters and whatever, right, that like might be there
if you're gonna mount these things to the ground.
The other is with these giant windmills
And when I was in Germany,
we were around these huge windmills all over
and just the sense of being near them is really crazy.
- And believe me, the offshore one,
I mean twice the wingspan of 747,
like these 10 megawatt turbines,
they're so big you can't even get your head
around how big they are.
It's just titans.
But to have them on a floating platform away from everyone,
where the noise is, where the sea life is not as plentiful,
where the sea birds are not as plentiful.
- Yeah, that's what I was gonna say is the other one
is people would say, look, these are harmful
to all the birds because there's so many bird strikes,
but you know, 10 miles offshore,
there's not that much bird traffic.
- Well, now we're talking 200 miles offshore.
- Okay, even further.
- Well, you're off the end of the continental shelf.
So you're way out there, the bird traffic is substantial.
And so that's a far less disruptive technology all around.
It increased costs, but the equipment's getting cheaper
and the power generation is valuable.
And it's minimally,
they're smart enough to survive severe weather.
So that's continuing to grow dramatically for a reason.
And taking the known technology for working offshore
and turning it into automated platforms for wind
makes a lot of sense.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So when I, circling back around,
when I hear people in the news or whatever say,
oh, we can't, we can't have this renewable future
because there is so much fluctuation and uncertainty.
I feel like it's just a lack of creativity.
- Yeah, well, I mean, these are old arguments.
We've been solving them steadily.
- Exactly, like we put people on the moon
with like wristwatch level computing.
Surely we can build some cranes or build some batteries.
- Well, we also did it in a very dangerous way.
The way we sent people to the moon was extremely risky.
That's why we stopped, right?
We want power that's safe and reliable.
And that's fairly, not to talk a little bit about nuclear
because nuclear can be safe.
It just hasn't been.
We stopped spending money on it.
We didn't modernize it.
- We stopped spending money almost at the moment
that we were moving beyond like water-based nuclear
where stuff would fail safer
rather than Fukushima type fail.
- Sure.
Funny thing about Fukushima.
There was actually six reactors at Fukushima.
We only, people only talk about one.
Four was offline and one through three melted down.
Nobody talks about five and six.
Five and six were exactly the same design,
but they had been modernized to have passive cooldown.
And so when they were one through four were,
and then they lost their generators,
just like one through four were,
they cooled down on their own without events.
- Oh, interesting.
I didn't realize that.
That's cool.
- Yeah, and they're undamaged, right?
Now the question is,
why didn't one through four have passive cooldown?
Because one through four were several years older
and the upgrade kits to make them passively cooled down
were expensive and took two years to install.
And since the plants only had about five,
six years of lifespan with it,
it was a financial decision
not to install the passive cool downs by Tepco.
- Probably something they wanna take back.
- Yeah, but you know, that's true of a lot of things.
You know, I'm pretty sure the, you know,
in Three Mile Island,
the operators had asked for an indicator light
for the pressure relief valve to show it was open or closed
and they put the light in,
but they wired it to the switch, not to the valve.
So you push the button, the light turned on,
you push the button, the light turned off,
nobody knew what the valve was doing.
And the valve sat open and allowed water to escape
from the vessel or was exposed and partially melted down.
People make mistakes, but part of this is reactor size.
The push to make in the 300 megawatt class
because that's the size of the coal power plants.
They knew how to operate that size,
they knew how the turbines work.
So they made these bigger nuclear reactors
and that's problematic because they are hard to cool down.
Now we've learned,
as soon as you shrink down to a more natural size,
to the 60 megawatt class,
you just don't have that problem.
So, and those are the reactors you find in aircraft carriers
and in submarines, those kinds of places.
And that's what you're seeing
in small modular nuclear reactors are the 60 megawatt class.
And these are the kind of reactors that you build
in a factory rather than build on site.
So they're not bespoke, they're standardized,
they're built with machines, they're consistent,
they're easy to test and validate.
And so they're very reliable.
You fuel them once, they run for 20 years on the fuel.
So no refueling every year, you run them solid for 20 years,
they are passively shut down because they're small enough.
You put the control rods in place,
they will simply go coal.
And so the folks I think are furthest along
in the modular nuclear,
they actually got their clearance contracts.
They got certified by the Atomic Energy Association
last year is NuScale.
And they actually have a contract in Utah
to build out the first modular plant.
And their plan is to actually put 12 of these together
on the site so that you get that same kind of 300,
400 megawatt power generation that is normal in grid,
but they just have multiple small redundant reactors
that they can swap them out as they need to be replaced.
And when you, at the end of 20 years, you don't refuel it.
You lift it back out of the ground,
you take it back to a factory where it is
and you put a new one in place.
So it's a very different approach to nuclear.
- Yeah.
It's gonna have to break a lot of stereotypes and fears.
Right?
You know, the Atomic Energy has now signed on with that.
So, 'cause it has passed.
And so, the Utah project, by the way,
is struggling now for new scale,
for the simple reason that costs have gone up.
And so, some of the municipalities
that signed on to buy power for them,
they're now finding out the new power price is higher,
and they're like, "Hey, I can get a natural gas plant
"for less than that.
"Like, why am I paying for this?"
And that's part of the challenge here.
Price is everything.
Cheaper, wind's getting cheaper.
Natural gas has always been cheap.
And so these guys are always struggling with,
as they develop these new technologies,
they're trying to get those costs absorbed
by their early sales and people who wanna pay for it.
- Yeah, it's a tough chicken and egg, right?
- Yeah.
- So let's talk about some more storage.
I do think the nuclear side is really interesting
because it's been shunned so badly since the '70s.
but it is carbon, it's zero carbon, right?
- Yeah, it does not-
- Basically, I mean, you gotta mine the stuff,
but yeah, yeah, exactly.
- It consumes carbon to, if you're gonna mine uranium
or find uranium, ship uranium, like those are issues.
It still has a consumable,
although the efficiency of that consumable,
it's hard to get your head around
how efficient it is in comparison.
How little you refine uranium it takes to run a power plant
compared to the amount of coal or natural gas
it takes to run a power plant.
And the problem is that the reason
that most people are familiar with,
is the pressurizer water designs,
light water designs,
were really meant to produce plutonium.
Like the reason that the United States
matured that technology was to make bombs.
Electricity, they get plutonium out of their cores.
And so it was designed to be disassembled every six months,
have the cores reprocessed, get the plutonium out,
make new cores and load them back in again.
And then they stopped reprocessing cores.
During the Ford administration,
when Carter was running against them
with the anti-nuclear proliferation,
Ford's attempt to get reelected,
he said, "I'll do what Jimmy wants us to do
and stop reprocessing cores."
And America has never reprocessed a fuel core since.
They just store them.
- Yeah, and that's also not good.
- No, the French, who 80% of their power
comes from pressurized water nuclear,
have continued to modernize their plants.
They always have reprocessed their cores.
In fact, they now reprocess plutonium into their cores.
It's called a MOX core.
And so they're actually burning plutonium.
And so they don't have the radiation storage problems.
They're not, 'cause they're reprocessing their fuel.
And by the way, when Germany decided to stop
using their nuclear plants after Fukushima,
to have enough power,
they bought nuclear power from France.
Like, that's how that worked.
- Yeah. - Modernizing,
Not that, you know, nuclear plants have their problems
and they need to be modernized
and they need to be more efficient than they are.
And there are better technologies
that still should be matured.
But these small modulars deal with most of that
and with relatively little new research need to be done.
And still it's a struggle.
- Yeah.
Yeah, super, super interesting.
So we only have about five minutes left.
- Yeah.
- But I do wanna talk about some more energy storage stuff
that's really interesting that people maybe
don't think about is, what if I just got a giant,
really balanced piece of steel and spun it really fast?
- The flywheel solution.
- Exactly.
- Well, and modern flywheels are better than ever.
These days they use air bearings.
Some of them, I've even seen versions
that have superconductive bearings so that,
so the whole trick with a flywheel
is minimizing friction.
Like how fast can we get it spinning and stay in shape?
And how long do we extract it?
Now, they're not as efficient as batteries.
They're (audio cuts out)
They have their own mechanicals,
like the stuff that needs to be taken care of.
But essentially, they're a part of a motor.
Like you only have to put a field coil
around that black wheel to extract power from it.
So they're expensive to manufacture,
and they take specialized operators to run.
Batteries in some respects, while expensive also,
are easier.
Flywheel's been around a long time.
When I was a kid and trying to get computer time
in the university, that computer backup system
was Flywheel for power.
It was like a 200-kilo set of Flywheels.
We went down to the Flywheel room one time.
And you talk about that threatening hum.
Flywheel lets you know if something goes wrong here,
you're not even gonna feel it.
When flywheels disintegrate,
that's a lot of mass moving in a hurry.
So they're interesting machines
and they're an interesting approach to storing power.
I think each of these power storage solutions
has merit depending on where you are
and what materials are expensive at the time.
Flywheels count on heavy ferrous metals being inexpensive
and those sophisticated bearing systems
to allow them to spin well
and spin them up and spin them down.
They're absolutely viable.
- I feel like they've gotten modernized
quite a bit recently.
- Well, everybody, it is the Repco superconductive
huge difference, 'cause you're floating
in a barren with no friction.
It's just not touching anything.
It's in an evacuated space.
The base of the main--
- And the way, like you said, you extract energy
is through magnetic stuff.
- So there's no physical contact.
- Turn gears, yeah, that's fantastic.
- Yeah, it's a very modern way to think,
but they make sense at a grid level.
They need to be large,
they need to be professionally operated,
and maintained.
- Yeah.
The other one, I'm not sure if I have a picture of it here,
actually, I don't think I do.
The other one has to do with
not storing water, but storing compressed air.
- Yeah, so where we see these are
where they have airtight large spaces,
like old salt mines, for example,
where they've done mining the salt,
but effectively the space is tight
and so they can pump pressure into them.
They have efficiency problems,
they have a minimum pressure,
so you've got to pump for a while
before you get to a pressure that would spin a turbine.
So they come in in the 70% range, a little bit lower,
But if you have the space,
like the expensive part would be making the tank, right?
Pumps are not that expensive and not that difficult.
But if you've got a huge volume of airtight space,
it's worth utilizing that.
Let me throw one other idea at you.
You know, on one hand, there's the idea of,
we're generating electricity and we need to store it
for when we can't generate it.
Then there's also the, we're generating more electricity
we need, where do we put this?
- Yeah.
If you didn't need it for electricity,
like why would you bother storing it in a battery?
Can you turn excess electricity into something valuable?
And so one of the areas of research going on right now
is water desalinization.
We have a freshwater problem.
So why not, when you have excess electricity available,
use electricity to desalinate water?
You're turning that excess power into something valuable.
There's a version of this, it's actually a kind of
pump storage solution.
So we pump seawater up to a high,
and then the drain system for that to lower it back down
again actually has a reverse osmosis filter on it
and just uses gravity to extract the fresh water.
- Yeah, how interesting.
- So taking existing design power storage,
and instead of using a turbine with that water coming down,
using it to extract fresh water from salt.
- Well, that's a lot of options,
a lot of different flexibilities
for where you're located by a mountain lake.
Do you have a mine?
- Pumped reverse off another solution.
It just consumes more energy.
But if you have the access to energy, why not?
And if you need the water,
water desalinization is getting more popular all the time.
You think about the drought that's going on
in Southern California.
The Israelis are leading the world
water desalinization.
It's a desert climate, it has water problems,
but they don't have a water problem anymore.
About 25% of their water is now desalinated water.
They use the reverse osmosis systems for it.
- Yeah.
- The challenge is that most of these mechanisms
take a while to get up to speed.
So, you know, it can take a day
to get a reverse osmosis system stabilized and pumping well.
And if you're trying to,
the hour window where you're making too much solar,
You don't have, the system's not efficient for that.
- Yeah, it doesn't respond fast enough, right?
- So there's a push to modernize, to update these systems
so that you have a 20 minute uptime.
Within 20 minutes we can do this.
So that three hour window in midday
where we have more solar we don't do it,
we can put it over to the reverse osmosis plant
and make fresh water.
- Awesome.
- Yeah.
- Well, Richard, thank you so much for being here
and sharing all these ideas
and doing the research for us.
I think.
- Yeah, you said it's a pleasure when you ask me
because these are all notes I'm keeping,
but then I spend a few days sorting them out
into a set of narratives,
like what are the important bits of all that?
So it's a pleasure for me too,
and really fun to talk to you.
- Yeah, yeah, it's always great to have you here
and who knows what we'll talk about next time, but it's-
- Well, Coke's a real subject,
and you know I'm interested in everything.
- That's right, I do know that for sure.
All right, so thank you for being here as always,
and yeah, have a good day.
And hey, we actually made this work from space.
- Yeah, yeah, the tail,
it seemed a little after that.
- That's right.
All right, bye Richard.
- See ya.
[BLANK_AUDIO]